# Gender-wage-gap-analysis-in-India

The research uses the traditional OLS regression method for examining the average wage gap between males and females and the standard Blinder Oaxaca (1973) decomposition method. Additionally, to answer the question of whether there exists “glass ceiling” or “sticky floor” in the Indian labor market the paper examines the quantile regressions at different levels of income distribution.


INTRODUCTION
India ranked 112th among the list of 153 countries and has so far closed 66.8%of the gender wage gap. This pay gap has prevailed due to multiple factors like disparity in education and job market. Indian women receive inadequate education and training for workforce. The guardians and teachers are unwilling to invest same time and resources as spent on preparing men for the labour market. Therefore, less focus is paid on development of female, and she ends up receiving poor quality of education. The literacy rate for women in India is around 70%, as compared to 85 percent men who receive education. It is also observed that participation rate of Indian women in the workforce has been declining over 20 years and stands at 21% which is
significantly less than the world’s average rate of 47% (World Bank 2018). Around 80% of employed women work in rural areas in agriculture sector and the remaining are a part of the urban labour market. This leads to another problem of poor working conditions that women face, as work in rural areas is by its very nature informal with no social security benefits. One of the major reasons for the low participation rate is that the work of women is not considered as remunerative, and majority of women engage in unpaid domestic services for the household members. This gives them lesser time for pursuing careers outside of the home. Restrictive cultural norms relating to women’s work is another reason for low participation.

The average gender wage differential is the difference in the mean wages of men and women expressed as percentage of women’s mean wage. The average wage differential has improved consistently over the years from 102 percent in the year 1983 to about 70 percent in the year 1983 followed by slight fall to 67 percent in the year 2004 to a sharp fall in the year 2010, when the differential is 44 percent. However, large amount of the wage gap still exists which needs to be examined.
The present study contributes to the existing literature by analysing the gender wage gap at the mean and across the wage distribution in India and finding prevalence of sticky floor or glass ceiling effect in the Indian labour market. Also, the analysis examines different divisions of the labour market based on the sector of residence (rural and urban) type of employment (casual or regular) and sector (rural and urban).
The study uses OLS wage regressions and quantile regressions to determine the returns to various covariates and how these returns vary over the wage distribution. The returns are estimated separately for men and women and for the pooled sample.
Section II of the paper presents the literature on the wage gap around the world and of India. Section III discusses the database used for conducting the analysis and Section IV explains the methodology used for the analysis. Section V presents the results and their explanation and Section VI presents the conclusion of the paper.
